# Quaternion space-times-time invariance as gravity

[The linked essay](../Stuff/pdfs/space-times-time-invariance.pdf) was submitted to the 
_2015 Essays on Gravitation_ contest run by the [Gravity Research 
Foundation](http://www.gravityresearchfoundation.org/index.html).

By comparison with typical technical physics papers, an effort was made to
make the math simpler and have less jargon. It is seven pages long. It has five
equations in the body of the paper, and five more in the appendix.  There are
eleven references.  

The results are in... The winner was an essay by Gerard 't Hooft, a Nobel Prize
winner and all around smart guy.  My essay did not win second, or third, or
forth, or fifth, or honerable mention.  The contest gets plenty of submissions
from fringe physicists.  I suspect the word "quaternion" in the title and my
non-academic address meant the paper was quickly dismissed.

## Hard core stuff

I did learn something about my own efforts from reading the paper.  His paper
was about conformal symmetry breaking.  Roughly speaking, that has to do with
the scale of measurements in time and space.  Maxwell's theory for how light
works has conformal symmetry.  If we use light to measure things, then the
absolute size of _anything_ cannot be known.  Cool.  We can figure out relative
sizes and times.

This cannot be the entire story since we can figure out the the absolute sizes
of things.  He writes that something about quantum gravity is going to break 
conformal symmetry.  You would have to read the paper to struggle to see his 
point.

In my own effort, there are two numbers that enter in to make measurements 
different.  One is the relativistic velocity of an observer.  That is plain old 
special relativity.  The other is the dimensionless gravitational length of a 
graviational source.  It would be this value that breaks conformal symmetry in 
quaternion gravity.
