Bet Against Lubos

I spent years being an active reader and sometime participant in the moderated
newsgroup sci.physics.research. In the early days of the text-heavy  Internet,
there were newsgroups on all kinds of subjects that would allow people to
exchange emails about the topic at hand. When information had to go through a
dialup modem, text was the road to take.

The unmoderated newsgroup sci.physics was a soapbox for crank physicists. One
guy loved to write "TIME IS MASS". While amusing, it was not worthy of much
time or mass.

The most important feature of SPR as it was sometimes called was that Prof.
John Baez and a few of his friends posted tehre regularly. Baez loved to teach,
often at great length. There was a farmer from England who called himself "Oz"
that Baez spent a big effort trying to teach some quite obscure mathematical
physics concepts. The battlez between Oz and the Wizard were fun and
informative to read. I would toss in my own two cents once in a while. Much of 
what Baez wrote would not stick in my brain since it was dense with math
jargon. On the occassion when these obscure discussion did reach me, it made
the time investment worthwhile. Mathematical physics is a difficult art, so it
was nice when I felt I understood a subtle issue.

Every community has its characters. A few times a year, [Lubos%C5% Motl](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lubo%C5%A1_Motl)
A few times a year, Lubos Motl would jump into a thread. If you know Lubos, you
know Lubos. The comments would get sharper, more biting when Lubos joined the
discussion.Lubos was strongly of the opinion that work on strings was the
correct direction to go. If you disagreed, then you were a complete and total
moron. I wondered if he was real or a bit of fiction.

Lubos Motl is real. It became clear to me after one exchange that I could not
have a rational argument with the man. He was right, I was wrong. He does have
a number of technical accomplishments. I have seen him lucidly describe issues
in high energy physics. In a programming contest sponsored by CERN to write a
program to pluck out a signal from a large dataset, I know he was in the
running but did not track his final place. He is active on the Internet. At
physics.stackexchange.com, he has over 130k reputation points. I have 34,
total.

A question I posed myself was how to deal with him.
