# Overview

## Unifying Two Views of Events

An experimentalist collects events about a physical system. A theorists builds
a model to describe what patterns of events within a system might generate the
experimentalist's data set. With hard work and luck, the two will agree!

Events are handled mathematically as 4-vectors. They can be added or subtracted
from another, or multiplied by a scalar. Nothing else can be done. A theorist
can import very powerful tools to generate patterns, like metrics and group
theory. Theorists in physics have been able to construct the most accurate
models of nature in all of science.

I hope to bring the full power of mathematics down to the level of the events
themselves. This may be done by representing events as the mathematical
division algebra
of quaternions. All the standard tools for creating mathematical patterns -
multiplication, trigonometric functions, transcendental functions, infinite
series, the special functions of physics - should be available for quaternions.
Now a theorist can create patterns of events with events. This may lead to a
better unification between the work of a theorist and the work of an
experimentalist.

## An Overview of Doing Physics with Quaternions

It has been said that one reason physics succeeds is because all the terms in
an equation are tensors of the same rank.  This work challenges that
assumption, proposing instead an integrated set of equations which are all
based on the same 4-dimensional mathematical division algebra of quaternions.  Mostly this
document shows in cookbook style how quaternion equations are equivalent to
approaches already in use.  As Feynman pointed out, "whatever we are allowed to
imagine in science must be consistent with everything else we know."   Fresh
perspectives arise because, in essence, tensors of different rank can mix
within the same equation.  The four Maxwell equations become one nonhomogeneous
quaternion wave equation, and the Klein-Gordon equation is part of a quaternion
simple harmonic oscillator.  There is hope for a new approach to gravity which
puts terms that have been ignored to good use.  Since all of the
tools used are woven from the same mathematical fabric, the interrelationships
become more clear to my eye.  Hope you enjoy. 
